so in
college I was a government major which
means I had to write a lot of papers now
when a normal student writes a paper
they might spread the work out a little
like this so you
know you get started maybe a little
slowly but you get enough done in the
first week that that with some heavier
days later on everything gets done and
things stay
civil and I would want to do that like
that that would be the plan I would uh I
would have it all ready to go but then
then then actually the paper would would
come along and then I would kind of do
this and that would happen every single
paper but then came my 90 page senior
thesis a paper you're supposed to spend
a year on I knew for a paper like that
my normal work work flow was not an
option it was way too big a project so I
planned things out and I decided I kind
of had to go something like this this is
how the year would go so I'd start off
light and I'd bump it up in the middle
months and then at the end I would kick
it up into high gear it's just like a
little staircase how hard could it be
just walk up the stairs no big deal
right but then funniest thing happened
those first few months they came and
went and I I couldn't quite do stuff so
we had an awesome new revised
plan and
then but then those middle months
actually went by and I didn't really
write words and so we were here and then
two months turned into one month which
turned into two weeks and one day I woke
up with three days until the
deadline still not having written a word
and so I did the only thing I could I
wrote 90 pages over 72 hours hours
pulling not one but two allnighters
humans are not supposed to pull two
allnighters sprinted across campus dove
in slow motion and got it in just at the
deadline I thought that was the end of
everything but a week later I get a call
it's the
school and they say is this Tim Urban
and I say yeah and they say we need to
talk about your thesis and I say
okay and they say it's the best one
we've ever seen
[Applause]
that did not
happen it was a very very bad
thesis I just wanted to enjoy that one
moment when all of you thought this guy
is
amazing no no it was very very
bad anyway today I'm a writer blogger
guy I write the blog weight but why and
a couple years ago I decided to write
about procrastination my Behavior's
always perplexed the non-pr around me
and I wanted to explain to the non-rr
inators of the world what goes on in the
heads of procrastinators and why we are
the way we are now I had a hypothesis
that the the brains of procrastinators
were actually different than the brains
of other people and to test this I found
an MRI lab that actually let me scan
both my brain and the brain of a proven
non-prorated compare them and I actually
brought them here to show you today and
I want you to take a look carefully to
see if you can notice a difference and I
know that if you're not a trained brain
expert it's not that obvious but just
take a look okay so here's the brain of
a non-prorated
maker in them but the procrastinator's
brain also has an instant gratification
monkey now what does this mean for the
procrastinator well means everything's
fine until this
happens so the rational decision maker
will make the rational decision to do
something productive but the monkey
doesn't like that plan so he actually
takes the wheel and he says actually
let's read the entire Wikipedia page of
the Nancy Carri and Tanya Harding
Scandal cuz I just remember that that
happened then
then we're going to go over to the
fridge we're going to see if there's
anything new in there since 10 minutes
ago after that we're going to go on a
YouTube spiral that starts with videos
of Richard Fineman talking about magnets
and ends much much later with us
watching interviews with Justin Bieber's
mom all of that's going to take a while
so we're not going to really have room
on the schedule for any work today
sorry now what is going on
here the instag gratification monkey
does not seem like a guy you want behind
the wheel he lives entirely in the
present moment he has no memory of the
past no knowledge of the future and he
only cares about two things easy and fun
now in the animal world that works fine
if you're a dog and you spend your whole
life doing nothing other than easy and
fun things you're a huge
success and to the monkey
humans are just another animal species
you has to keep well slept well fed and
propagating into the Next
Generation which in tribal times might
have worked okay but if you haven't
noticed now we're not in tribal times
we're in an advanced civilization and
the monkey does not know what that is
which is why we have another guy in our
brain the rational decision maker who
gives us the ability to do things no
other animal can do we can visualize the
future we can see the big picture we can
make long-term plans and he wants to
take all all of that into
account and he wants to just have us do
whatever makes sense to be doing right
now now sometimes it makes sense to be
doing things that are easy and fun like
when you're having dinner or going to
bed or enjoying well earn leisure time
that's why there's an overlap sometimes
they agree but other times it makes much
more sense to be doing things that are
harder and Less Pleasant for the sake of
the big picture and that's when we have
a conflict and for the procrastinator
that conflict tends to end a certain way
every time leaving him spending a lot of
time in this orange Zone an easy and fun
place that's entirely out of the makes
sense Circle I call it the dark
Playground
now the dark playground is a place that
all of you procrastinators out there
know very well it's where leisure
activities happen at times when leisure
activities are not supposed to be
happening the fun you have in the dark
playground isn't actually fun because
it's completely unearned and the air is
filled with guilt dread anxiety
self-hatred all those good
procrastinator feelings and the question
is in this situation with the monkey
behind the wheel how does the
procrastinator ever get himself over
here to this Blue Zone a Less Pleasant
place but we really important things
happen Well turns out that the
procrastinator has a guardian angel
someone who's always looking down on him
and watching over him in his darkest
moments someone called the Panic monster
now the Panic monster is dormant most of
the time but he suddenly wakes up
anytime a deadline gets too close or
there's danger of public embarrassment a
career disaster or some other scary
consequence and importantly he's the
only thing that the monkey is terrified
of now he became very relevant in my
life pretty recently because people of
Ted reached out to me about months ago
and invited me to do a TED
talk now of course I said yes it's
always been a dream of mine to have done
a TED Talk in the
[Applause]
past but in the middle of all this
excitement the rational decision maker
seemed to have something else in his
mind he was saying are we
on what we just accepted do we do we get
what's going to be now happening one day
in the future we need to sit down and
work on this right now and the monkey
said totally agree but also let's just
open Google Earth and let's zoom into
the bottom of India like 200 feet above
the ground and we're going to scroll up
for two and a half hours till we get to
the top of the country so we can get a
better feel for
India so that's what we did that day
[Applause]
as six months turned into four and then
two and then one the people of Ted
decided to release the speakers and I
opened up the website and there was my
face staring right back at me and guess
who woke
up so the Panic monster starts losing
his mind and a few seconds later the
whole system's in
Mayhem and the monkey who remember he's
terrified at the Panic Monster boom he's
up the tree and finally finally the
rational decision maker can take the
wheel and I can start working on the
talk now the Panic monster explains all
kinds of pretty insane procrastinative
Behavior like how someone like me could
spend two weeks unable to start the
opening sentence of a paper and then
miraculously find the unbelievable work
work ethic to stay up all night and
write eight
pages and this entire situation with the
three characters this is the
procrastinator system it's not pretty
but in the end it works and this is what
I decided to write about on the blog
just a couple years ago now when I did I
was amazed by the response literally
thousands of emails came in from all
different kinds of people from all over
the world doing all different kinds of
things these were people who were nurses
and bankers and Painters and engineers
and lots and lots of PhD
students and they were all writing
saying the same thing I have this
problem too but what struck me was the
contrast between the light tone of the
post and the heaviness of these emails
these people were writing with intense
frustration about what procrastination
had done to their lives about what this
monkey had done to
them and I thought about this and I said
if the procrastinator system works then
what's going on why are all these people
in such a dark place Well turns out that
there's two kinds of procrastination
everything I've talked about today the
examples I've given they all have
deadlines and when there's deadlines the
effects of procrastination are contained
to the shortterm because the Panic
monster gets involved but there's a
second kind of procrastination that
happens in situations when there is no
deadline so if you want to have a career
where you want to be a selfstarter
something in the Arts something
entrepreneurial there's no deadlines on
those things at first because nothing's
happening at first not until you've gone
out and done the hard work to get some
momentum to get things going there's
also all kinds of important things
outside of your career that don't
involve any deadlines like seeing your
family or exercising and taking care of
your health working on your relationship
or getting out of a relationship that
isn't working now if procrastinator's
only mechanism of doing these hard
things is the Panic monster that's a
problem because in all of these non-
deadline situations the Panic monster
doesn't show up he has nothing to wake
up for so the effects of procrastination
they're not contained they just extend
outward
forever and it's this long-term kind of
procrastination that's much less visible
and much less talked about than the
funnier short-term deadline based kind
it's usually suffered quietly and
privately and it can be the source of a
huge amount of long-term unhappiness and
regrets and I thought you know that's
why these people are emailing and that's
why they're in such a bad place it's not
that they're cramming for some project
it's that long-term procrastination has
made them feel like a spectator at times
in their own lives you know the
frustration was not that they couldn't
achieve their dreams it's that they
weren't even able to start chasing them
so I read these emails and I had a
little bit of an
epiphany that I don't think nonpr
procrastinators exist that's right I
think all of you are
procrastinators now you might not all be
a mess like some of
us and some of you may have a healthy
relationship with deadlines but remember
the monkey sneakiest trick is when the
deadlines aren't there now I want to
show you one last thing I call this a
life calendar that's one box for every
week of a 90-year life that's not that
many boxes especially since we've
already used a bunch of those so I think
we need to all take a long hard look at
that
Calender and we need to think about what
we're really procrastinating on because
everyone is proc procrastinating on
something in
life we need to stay aware of the
instant gratification
monkey that's a job for all of us and
because there's not that many boxes on
there it's a job that should probably
start today well maybe not today
but you know sometime soon thank you
w